Let's take a look at what JAXB is.
What does the name mean,
what is its relation to other APIs for processing XML in Java,
and when would you want to use JAXB over one of the other APIs?
Let's start with the name.
The name JAXB is an acronym that stands for Java Architecture for XML Binding.
It is obviously about Java and XML, but what does the word binding mean?
What you can do with JAXB is convert Java objects to XML and vice versa.
The word binding refers to the mapping between Java
classes and fields to structures in XML,
such as elements and attributes.
Java has different APIs for working with XML,
which means that there are different ways that you can
read or write data in XML in Java.
Which one of the APIs is best for the job depends on what
exactly you need to do with the XML.
I'll give you a quick overview of the XML APIs in Java so that you
understand the main ideas and where JAXB fits in.
Let's first take a look at the lower-level APIs: DOM, SAX, and StAX.
DOM stands for Document Object Model.
When you use the DOM API to read an XML file,
you're building a tree in-memory that consists of nodes
that directly correspond to the elements,
attributes, text, and other items in the XML.
This is a straightforward and relatively easy way to work with the XML.
You read the XML and then you get a tree of nodes that you
can process as needed in your application.
The DOM API consists of the org.
w3c.
dom package in the JDK, which, for example,
contains interfaces such as document, element,
and attr, which are representations of an XML document,
element, and attribute.
The DOM API is easy to use,
but a disadvantage is that is doesn't scale well to large XML documents.
Before your program can process the XML,
the whole document is loaded into memory.
If the document is very large, this can take up a lot of memory.
Therefore, if you need to process large documents,
you can choose to use the SAX or StAX API instead.
SAX stands for Simple API for XML.
It works in a completely different way than the DOM API.
Instead of converting the XML document into a tree of nodes in-memory,
it's an event-based API.
The SAX parser reads the XML and calls callback methods in
your program whenever it encounters, for example,
the start tag, text, and end tag or something else in the XML.
The callback methods in your program then inspect what is
found and take the appropriate action.
The SAX API consists of the package org.
xml.
sax and related packages in the JDK.
If you use the SAX API,
you'll most likely want to implement the ContentHandler interface,
which defines the callback methods that the SAX parser will call.
The SAX API is a bit more cumbersome to use than the DOM API,
but since it doesn't need to load the whole document into memory,
it works on large XML files just as well as on small XML files.
StAX stands for Streaming API for XML.
The idea of the StAX API is similar to that of the SAX API.
It's event based.
The main difference between the SAX and the StAX APIs is that
SAX is push based while StAX is pull based.
This means that with SAX it's the parser that is in control and that
calls the callback methods in your application,
so it pushes events to your application,
while with StAX, your program is in control,
and it calls the StAX API to get the next event out
of the XML that's being processed,
so you're pulling the events out of the parser.
The StAX API consists of the package javax.
xml.
stream and related packages in the JDK.
The most important interfaces are XMLStreamReader and
XMLStreamWriter for reading and writing XML.
In my experience,
the StAX API is a bit more convenient to use than the SAX API in many cases,
but it's still a low-level API,
which means that you have to deal with all the details of parsing,
and you'll likely end up writing a lot of boilerplate code,
even for parsing relatively simple XML documents.
In contrast to DOM, SAX, and StAX, JAXB is a higher-level API,
which means that it takes care of a lot of details for you so that
you don't have to write and maintain so much code.
JAXB can automatically convert Java objects to XML and vice versa,
mapping the field of a domain model class to child
elements or attributes in the XML.
JAXB works with XML schema files.
When you work with JAXB,
you are working with two representations of your domain model.
On the Java side, you have a number of Java classes that define the domain model,
and on the XML side, you have an XML schema that defines the same domain model.
It would, of course,
be cumbersome if you had to manually keep the Java
and XML domain models synchronized.
It's better to start from either Java or an XML schema and
then generate either schema from your Java classes or
generate Java classes from your schema.
This corresponds to the two approaches to work with JAXB: the
code-first approach and the schema-first approach.
With the code-first approach, you generate an XML schema,
an XSD file, from your Java domain model classes.
You give this XSD file to your business partner who needs to
work with the XML that your software produces so that he or
she knows what the XML looks like.
With the schema-first approach, it's the other way around.
You start with an XML schema, an XSD file,
and you generate the source code for your Java
domain model classes from the schema.
This is useful, for example,
if you get the XSD file from a business partner or from an
information analyst or architect in your own company.
JAXB is fairly useful for many applications that need to work with XML.
It's especially useful if you have a more elaborate domain model
because you won't need to write a lot of boilerplate code to convert
your domain model objects from and to XML.
Having an XSD that describes your domain model is also a good thing,
especially if you use XML to exchange data with systems built by other
people who need to know what your domain model looks like.
You can then just give them your XSD.
However,
there are a few reasons why for some applications you might want to
use one of the lower-level APIs instead of JAXB.
For writing XML,
the low-level APIs give you more precise control over what the XML
looks like since they are closer to the XML itself.
For example,
normally it shouldn't matter to your application if text is in a CDATA
section or represented in a different way in the XML since
semantically the meaning of the XML is the same.
But if for some reason it matters,
the low-level APIs will let you make the distinction,
while JAXB tends to hide such details.
When you need to deal with very large XML documents,
the SAX or StAX APIs might be more suitable than DOM or JAXB since SAX and StAX don't require loading the complete document into memory.